GWEN IFILL: Good evening. I'm Gw
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy Wood
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour" to
migration under way, as refugees
flow into Europe -- the search f
on how to handle the largest mas
of people since World War II.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also ahead this W
Another cease-fire in Ukraine is
-- why efforts to stop trench wa
East have not led to lasting pea
GWEN IFILL: Plus: Lawyers and do
to increase access to care, a le
that helps restore patients' hea
costs.
DR. KERRY RODABAUGH, Nebraska Me
If we can get somebody reinstate
insurance plan, then they're goi
to afford to take their anti-hyp
medication and their blood press
to be improved. And who would've
that, that an attorney's going t
blood pressure?
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Obama s
victory today on the Iran nuclea
34th Senate Democrat came out in
to uphold a presidential veto of
to reject the agreement.
Maryland's Barbara Mikulski prov
vote, and called the deal -- quo
best option available to block I
a nuclear bomb."
But on CNN's "Amanpour," Secreta
John Kerry called for even more
JOHN KERRY, U.S. Secretary of St
obviously, 34 votes are enough v
president's veto to be able to b
But we're not -- that's not the
approaching this. We want anybod
hopefully to be able to vote for
going to continue to try to pers
up until the last moment.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It would take at
to block a Republican resolution
from coming to a vote. Republica
said today that they will go ahe
debate next week.
GWEN IFILL: Another day, another
Wall Street, this time to the up
came to the market in a buying m
after the latest sell-off. The D
average gained more than 290 poi
above 16350. The Nasdaq rose 114
the S&P 500 added 35.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The CIA and U.S.
forces have launched a drone cam
Islamic State leaders. The Washi
reports drones are being used fo
killings inside Syria. The effor
substantial increase in the CIA'
role in the Syrian conflict.
GWEN IFILL: In Iraq, masked men
military uniforms kidnapped 18 T
firm workers in Baghdad. The kid
a site at a sports complex early
as the workers were sleeping. Tu
said the Turkish workers were se
from the rest and taken away.
TANJU BILGIC, Turkish Foreign Mi
(through translator): At this st
difficult to comment on why this
happened or the motive behind it
touch with the Turkish construct
We have learned that, among the
kidnapped, there were 14 workers
and one accountant. Of course we
to follow the issue.
GWEN IFILL: There was no claim o
but suspicion fell on Islamic St
Turkey recently began airstrikes
militants in Syria.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The state of Cali
today to post crucial data on po
public online. A new Web site di
number of law enforcement office
in the line of duty, as well as
die during arrests or in custody
to the data, the state had 685 i
deaths annually between 2005 and
an average of 10 police officers
on the job every year from 1980
GWEN IFILL: President Obama clos
three-day visit to Alaska today
a spotlight on the lives of nati
He visited a village where he go
look at local salmon fishing. He
to highlight how the warming cli
native communities.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And one of the la
of the great San Francisco Earth
died. Ruth Newman was just 5 yea
on a ranch north of the city, wh
hit in 1906. The violent shaking
fires that raged unchecked for d
of the city was destroyed, and m
people died. Her family says tha
passed away in late July. She wa
old.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
from Syria and other nations in
for passage deeper into Europe;
to stem violence and the turmoil
and much more.
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: There is even more t
report tonight, as desperate mig
refugees attempt to make their w
through Europe.
At least 11 people drowned near
island of Kos when two boats san
this small boy, captured in a ph
immediately went viral. They are
to be Syrian refugees.
Meanwhile, in Hungary, the gover
rail travel for refugees and mig
a desperate and angry situation
Budapest.
James Mates of Independent Telev
is there and he filed this repor
JAMES MATES: The mood is darkeni
Budapest's main station. Almost
since the exit route north to Au
then Germany was closed, and the
impatience among the thousands h
in a country where they don't wa
They chant the name of the place
believe they will find a welcome
kept riot gear, even cans of C.S
to hand, though, in the event, n
But it is down beneath the stati
leading to the city's metro that
thousands here are making home,
of humanity spread across concre
most with nothing more than a bl
of foam.
It is shelter from the blazing s
cover at night. But for parents
families, this is no place to be
Samir Hasnan was a computer engi
traveling now with his wife and
Unhappy as he is right here, it
than where he came from.
SAMIR HASNAN, Migrant: What push
over here is the war in my count
is I don't want to be killing or
from other people. So, I have to
with my children from over there
peace, peaceful place on the ear
JAMES MATES: There are many, man
here, some physically small, and
very young are pressed into fami
is food and water, but nothing f
do from morning until night. A v
in paper and pencils, a kind tho
no more than a gesture.
A standpipe has been erected for
and hygiene, but aid workers fea
happen if this situation drags o
LYDIA BALL, Aid Worker: There ar
of people here. You can see that
only one water source here for p
else is provided for by voluntee
Hungarians who bring the stuff t
The government is nowhere to be
stuck here. They can't travel fu
JAMES MATES: Far from this spot
on the Danube, the government in
it alone is enforcing European r
ZOLTAN KOVACS, Hungarian Governm
Law and order should be reestabl
borders of the European Union. D
should be reintroduced to the sy
which not only Hungary, but the
are handling migrants. And we ha
reality. This is not a refugee c
is a major -- this is a mass mig
is coming from Africa and the Ne
requires a different handling, a
rules.
JAMES MATES: There are undoubted
migrants among the thousands her
it's also true a clear majority
from war in Syria, or Iraq or Af
And as they remind us, above all
human, and might have expected,
better than this.
GWEN IFILL: For more on the econ
tensions sparked by the rising t
we turn to Astrid Ziebarth, a mi
with the German Marshall Fund in
Nancy Lindborg, the president of
Institute of Peace here in Washi
previously served as assistant a
for the Bureau for Democracy, Co
Humanitarian Assistance at the U
for International Development.
Welcome to you both.
Nancy Lindborg, why are we seein
I think uptick is almost too sma
to describe this flood of migran
NANCY LINDBORG, President, U.S.
of Peace: Well, we are seeing an
on pace to double from the numbe
Europe a year ago.
But we really need to remember t
a small tip of a very large glob
where we're seeing 60 million pe
from their homes over this past
is the largest ever. And you hav
are giving up hope. They are liv
of repression, poverty, conflict
ending, and they are seeking a b
at great cost, at great danger f
and their families.
GWEN IFILL: Some people try to d
between people who are escaping
people who are escaping economic
Is there any distinction to be m
NANCY LINDBORG: Well, I think th
Clearly, legally, refugees are t
fleeing persecution, conflict an
That 60 million is people who ha
displaced from their homes and a
internally displaced or are alre
The importance, however, is how
are so intermixed, where you hav
poor governance, and poverty tha
with conflict.
GWEN IFILL: One thing leads to t
leads to the other.
NANCY LINDBORG: Exactly.
GWEN IFILL: Astrid Ziebarth, in
Merkel, among others, have said
accept up to 800,000 of these mi
find some way to take care of th
thousand arrived just last month
a plan that's Germany-specific o
that can begin to tackle this?
ASTRID ZIEBARTH, German Marshall
first of all, we have to have no
800,000 are a projection for the
and this was stated by our inter
but it's not entirely transparen
numbers come about, so we always
cautious about this, because the
-- the authorities also switched
system of how to account for it.
So, this is just a note as we go
What is to be noted is that Germ
currently to take up that many m
refugees, but, as you also state
to be cautious not to just see t
are refugees from Syria are flee
and violence, but almost 42 perc
from the Western Balkans and the
recognition for asylum is less t
So this is something where the G
is trying to figure out how to s
processes for those who are flee
and violence, but also trying to
if those who are not, how they c
GWEN IFILL: Well, let me stay wi
a moment, because there has been
in Germany, not only Germany, bu
of this in Hungary, where people
to say, we can't absorb all of t
picking up speed, that attitude?
ASTRID ZIEBARTH: At the moment,
the number of 800,000 being put
also in the public, it's remarka
public mood in Germany is still
You have -- the latest public op
state that you have 60 percent o
who say that we can cope with th
interior minister also said, wel
cope with this for a while, but
deal with such a high amount for
is the question. And here's wher
government also turns to the Eur
GWEN IFILL: Nancy Lindborg, you
was the tip of an iceberg. So, t
someone has figured out or tried
how to handle this before.
There's something called a Dubli
which is the way that people try
this. Explain what that is and w
is working anymore.
NANCY LINDBORG: Well, the Dublin
was simply an agreed-upon rule w
European Union that where you la
country in which you sought asyl
what's being shifted right now.
The larger question is not just
we deal with those who are arriv
right now, but how do we address
conflicts and repression that is
out? Because you have a large pi
people who are displaced, but st
their borders. And as these conf
unaddressed, there are many, man
may be seeking refuge into the f
GWEN IFILL: And, at some point,
-- we have seen Iceland -- a lot
say they would open their homes
There are others. But at some po
of nations are hanging back and
whether the backlash will make t
on this end, as well as that end
NANCY LINDBORG: Absolutely.
And I would also note that if yo
the Middle East, this was a regi
with refugees even before the Sy
And since then, you have the cou
the immediate region like Turkey
Jordan who have taken the majori
four million Syrian refugees to
In Lebanon, one out of four peop
there is Syrian, which is an alm
number to imagine happening in E
country.
GWEN IFILL: Astrid Ziebarth, is
discussion about imposing quotas
of people allowed in?
ASTRID ZIEBARTH: Well, yes, ther
discussion about quotas.
What is remarkable, that a year
at the European level or nationa
have talked about quotas, but we
that the crisis has gotten so ur
at first the European Commission
the discussion about quotas in t
And then they also proposed thei
on migration.
It was met by fierce opposition
wanted to have binding quotas. B
other member states said, well,
want to have binding quotas. And
had especially Eastern European
that were against binding quotas
pushing for voluntary quotas, bu
that is voluntary is always hard
an agreement on that one.
So, we're now seeing again the d
about quotas and it will be defi
the table for the upcoming confe
when the interior ministers meet
GWEN IFILL: Nancy Lindborg, is t
at all about resettling any of t
or migrants in the United States
NANCY LINDBORG: Well, the United
about 70,000 refugees every year
a country, we have actually bene
from the vibrancy that many of t
bring.
Since 9/11, it's been a lot hard
in refugees from the Middle East
the number from Syria thus far i
I certainly hope that we can fin
to increase that, because we wil
benefit as a country, as well as
home and a future to so many peo
GWEN IFILL: Nancy Lindborg, pres
U.S. Institute of Peace, and Ast
of the German Marshall Fund in B
us tonight, thank you very much.
NANCY LINDBORG: Thank you, Gwen.
JUDY WOODRUFF: While much of the
turned away from Ukraine this su
fighting there largely raged on,
wounding more fighters and civil
to displace people in that count
Yet another cease-fire between R
and Ukrainian forces went into e
week, but many aren't holding th
Chief foreign affairs correspond
Warner has this update.
MARGARET WARNER: For children ac
even in war-torn Donetsk, this i
week, with its traditional assem
ceremonies. It also provided the
for a cease-fire that went into
But it was violated today near r
Luhansk, when a Ukrainian army v
ambushed, killing two people.
Indeed, now in its second year o
cease-fires brokered by European
repeatedly failed to stick. Inst
warfare rages on in Eastern Ukra
government troops and Russian-ba
All told, some 6,800 people have
more than two million have fled
and those who remain live in a c
of fear.
WOMAN (through translator): When
when the night is coming, we are
something, because there are alm
nights.
MARGARET WARNER: Washington Post
Thomas Gibbons-Neff just returne
Ukraine, where he spent five day
line with a Ukrainian army unit
with rebels just a thousand yard
THOMAS GIBBONS-NEFF, The Washing
Every night, it was kind of the
but that same routine involved a
know, palpable sense of tension.
ready for someone to say, hey, t
across this field, get ready to
death, or prepare to retreat.
Like, it was a strange routine,
that it happened the same every
that same night, every night inv
maybe this is it, maybe this is
the big attack.
MARGARET WARNER: The conflict in
has stoked political tensions in
Kiev. Far-right nationalists pro
outside Parliament, as it voted
autonomy to rebel areas.
Violence broke out, killing thre
guardsmen and hospitalizing 140
the lawmakers held a rowdy sessi
with chanting, paper-tossing and
speeches over whether to decentr
a condition agreed to by Preside
as demanded by Russia, in last F
Minsk accord designed to end the
The Ukrainian Parliament speaker
colleagues to vote for the measu
VOLODYMYR GROYSMAN, Ukrainian Pa
(through translator): Difficult
are not easy to make. The thing
today will stop the Ukrainian na
a slave to others. The authority
place will belong to the people
will be an independent, sovereig
and rich country.
MARGARET WARNER: Meanwhile, Wash
Russia for the continued turmoil
JOSEPH BIDEN, Vice President of
States: The fact of the matter i
is now under siege. Russia is bu
outposts on Ukrainian soil. The
to redraw the borders of Europe
not only Ukraine, but the shared
for a Europe that is whole and f
peace.
MARGARET WARNER: NATO is now con
exercises on Russia's doorstep.
five U.S. warships and 1,000 tro
other nations in Operation Sea B
Black Sea.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Margaret join
Margaret, welcome.
So, how significant is this ceas
pointed out it was broken almost
MARGARET WARNER: It was, though,
of U.S. officials, it is holding
be holding.
And so they want the Europeans n
really handling these negotiatio
Putin very hard, Russian Preside
hard, to keep up his end of the
was, in return for the constitut
that Poroshenko is pushing for t
to withdraw Russian heavy weapon
from Ukraine.
The question is, what's the ince
Putin to do this? If Putin's obj
to keep Ukraine weakened and div
it very, very hard for them to b
kind of progressive, forward-loo
nation they want to, at low cost
And the only answer the American
up with, and the Europeans, is,
the sanctions are beginning to b
he will decide he has to keep up
-- carry out the military side o
But they do not think that will
maneuvers to undermine Ukraine.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So you were repor
vote in Parliament over the last
days, devolving authority back t
Violent protest, what was drivin
MARGARET WARNER: I think, Judy,
the more disturbing thing that h
in the last week or two. And tha
there is growing resistance to t
a negotiated settlement with the
We have had a growing kind of ra
in the western part of Ukraine a
has ground on and on. And so, on
there were these two fringe far-
who did very poorly in the elect
is one. The other is called the
And people call them skinheads,
calls them Nazis. And they were
actual event. But the deeper pro
is that there is growing unhappi
the idea of a negotiated settlem
attitude of these hard-right par
should we give anything to these
when they continue killing -- yo
been hundreds killed since this
And that is -- they're calling f
war right now on the eastern fro
of course, is fantasy. If the Uk
were to try to step up the war,
and their proteges would crush t
is a very persistent theme from
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, is it clear
broader Ukrainian public thinks?
MARGARET WARNER: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Yes, there were t
but what do most people think?
MARGARET WARNER: So, there are p
that while the most extreme rhet
resonated yet -- the leader of o
parties, Yarosh, says, well, now
to go after our internal enemies
President Poroshenko.
That is not hitting the public.
that they are being played as fo
that Ukrainians are dying -- tho
are in the paper every single da
this whole idea of a negotiated
is flawed.
The problem with that is that, s
NATO, the U.S., the Europeans ar
to enter and help Ukrainians mil
negotiated solution is the only
them. So it puts the Ukrainian g
in a difficult position. Plus, t
is furious because economically
hard.
All these things they had to do
requirements, for example, or ge
restructured has meant end of su
people pay more for electricity
So, all in all, it's kind of a s
And, again, if the aim of Putin
to so destabilize this governmen
public will essentially kick the
will put in someone, or try to,
to Russia.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And just quickly,
what is the U.S. role in all of
do U.S. officials you talk to th
to happen?
MARGARET WARNER: Two things, Jud
The U.S. -- we have seen multipl
from Vice President Biden, Secre
even the president to Ukrainian
officials. They have been mentor
how to handle the economic issue
But they recognize that, again,
of the U.S. being willing to ste
assistance, give true military a
that Ukraine is, to some degree,
and one senior official said to
to play survivor, which I think
is outwit, outplay and outlast y
with a little help from the U.S.
But it is not -- that is not the
a powerful alliance that can res
JUDY WOODRUFF: Another tough one
MARGARET WARNER: Yes.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Margaret Warner,
MARGARET WARNER: Always a pleasu
GWEN IFILL: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour": doc
join forces to reduce patient co
their health; college students h
school, how universities are wor
more mental health resources on
a fresh take on the implications
in the digital age.
But, first, militants in the Isl
group have been destroying templ
treasures in Syria over the past
weeks, all part of a continuing
target the region's cultural her
Jeffrey Brown has the story, par
series Culture at Risk.
JEFFREY BROWN: Satellite images
by the U.N. confirmed the fears:
of the Temple of Bel in the anci
city of Palmyra.
GIOVANNI BOCCARDI, UNESCO: We kn
that some time after the 27th of
likely on the 30th of August, th
was blown up by explosives.
UNESCO official Giovanni Boccard
GIOVANNI BOCCARDI: It was dedica
god, Bel, but during Byzantine t
turned into a church and then wi
of the Arabs, it was turned into
So this is why it has this profo
meaning, which goes beyond sort
and even aesthetic aspects.
JEFFREY BROWN: Palmyra, a modern
antiquities site located 150 mil
of Damascus, was taken over by I
in May, who then continued a pat
ancient sites in Iraq and Syria.
they destroyed a smaller temple
and, before that, beheaded Khale
an 82-year-old Syrian archaeolog
looked after the city's sites fo
four decades.
On another front, the FBI last w
a statement urging U.S. art deal
careful when buying antiquities
East, saying there is evidence c
have recently been offered artif
by Islamic State fighters in Syr
Joining me now is Brenton Easter
agent with the Homeland Security
Immigration and Customs Enforcem
Danti, an archaeologist at Bosto
who's worked in the region for m
and advises the State Department
Michael Danti, let me start with
Help us to understand a little b
what has been lost. Tell us abou
and the specific temple.
MICHAEL DANTI, Boston University
is a site that dates back to the
several thousand years B.C., but
most known for is standing Greco
that largely date to first and s
A.D.
It was essentially an antiquity
met West in the Syrian desert, l
with the great caravan traffic b
Mediterranean and East Asia. So
fusion of cultures and antiquity
in antiquity for its multicultur
JEFFREY BROWN: You and I talked
issue most recently after the de
of sites in Iraq. When you look
this, is there a pattern that yo
about why specific sites are bei
at this point?
MICHAEL DANTI: Yes.
In many ways, Palmyra serves as
for the larger picture, for Isla
and Jabhat al-Nusra destructions
into new territory. As their foo
expanded out, the first step gen
they carry out deliberative dest
Muslim heritage, generally Sufi
such as mosques, historic school
And those destructions happened
after ISIL moved into the Tadmor
Palmyra region.
JEFFREY BROWN: Right.
MICHAEL DANTI: They blew up two
Muslim sites.
Then they move on to looting cul
museum collections, the collecti
individuals. And they began disc
ISIL leadership in Tadmor about
archaeological site of Palmyra u
That was followed by the plantin
IEDs in many of the structures a
And then it was just a matter of
something happened.
And we don't know what the timin
of these destructions of Baal Sh
temple. That may become clearer.
(CROSSTALK)
JEFFREY BROWN: Let me bring in B
on that issue, particularly on -
the FBI issuing this warning. We
about the antiquities as a sourc
for ISIS.
Is this a certainty at this poin
specifically are you seeing comi
antiquities market?
BRENTON EASTER, Immigration and
One of the things that HSI has d
over the past few is we have beg
these cases not just as cultural
investigations, but also as fina
So, we are tracing the money. An
that these revenue streams can f
things. We are trying to tackle
One of the things that I heard e
the program that Gwen Ifill was
is how conflict is a problem wit
Well, when you have conflict are
are fleeing or moving in large q
you're also going to have a lot
commodities, which ISIS can use
fund, being smuggled as well.
JEFFREY BROWN: How much -- can I
in that, how much...
BRENTON EASTER: Sure.
JEFFREY BROWN: Do we know how mu
talking about? Do we know how ma
we're talking about? What is the
the damage and of what's flowing
BRENTON EASTER: Well, that's a v
And I don't know if you're ever
able to get an exact number or t
of that. You're hearing differen
from all different people saying
things. What we have seen is tha
these commodities coming out, th
offered to people outside of Syr
the pieces are still in Syria wh
them being offered.
Other times, they have made it t
the transshipment locations. Wha
noticed is that once they do lea
into a very large transnational
network, which is expert at smug
things, it's expert at layering
and paperwork to be associated w
pieces, so that they can be ente
market.
They also are very good at stori
for a period of time, so, someti
have these pieces sit for five,
they will actually be shown some
of the major consumer markets li
JEFFREY BROWN: Well, I was going
briefly about the U.S. Is there
it is coming in? I know this is
working very hard to stop it fro
the U.S. Is there any evidence t
are getting in yet?
BRENTON EASTER: Well, what I can
is that we are creating a very l
that deals with looted and stole
Now, that includes not just comi
Syria or Iraq or the Middle East
that's being looted all around t
although we do have a lot of stu
specifically coming out of these
regions that we're discussing to
When it does come across the U.S
to intercept it. When it does hi
we do hope to hit it. However, a
we aren't seeing large amounts o
hitting at this time.
JEFFREY BROWN: Michael Danti, ju
30 seconds, if you could, are we
-- the way that this gets attent
expect to see more of this or wh
done at this point?
MICHAEL DANTI: With regard to th
destructions, what can be done i
ISIL. Nonstate actors in Syria a
primarily responsible for this t
Sources on the ground in Tadmor
there will be more of these ISIL
so that they can gain media atte
to take away some of the attenti
recent failures in other areas i
Syria.
JEFFREY BROWN: You think some of
to do with failures; that's why
be doing this?
MICHAEL DANTI: Yes, I think some
they're trying to control the me
to divert attention away from te
losses to Kurdish forces in the
in some other theaters in the co
It serves as a very powerful ide
for the organization for recruit
a form of psychological warfare.
believes that this type of destr
pre-Islamic heritage is primaril
the West.
JEFFREY BROWN: All right, Michae
Brenton Easter, thank you both v
JUDY WOODRUFF: Struggling throug
is never easy. But studies have
even harder for people who do no
money, education or other resour
In response, many hospital syste
the country have begun establish
medical-legal partnerships. Lawy
allies, not adversaries, teaming
helping disadvantaged patients w
problems that could interfere wi
Special correspondent Jackie Jud
from Omaha, Nebraska.
JACKIE JUDD: Diego Salcido is on
old, and he has had more happen
life than people 10 times his ag
of leukemia led to a bone marrow
which failed, so he had a second
mother is a constant presence by
HILDA OLMEDO CUEVAS, Mother (thr
It's been a very rough year. But
me on my feet. I don't know wher
up with all this strength, my so
WOMAN: White count today is up t
JACKIE JUDD: Diego has a team of
social workers and lawyer -- yes
-- trying everything they can to
What do you think it's going to
you go home?
HILDA OLMEDO CUEVAS (through tra
I would be very happy when we go
will be as well. We just have to
new difficulties.
JACKIE JUDD: One of those diffic
whether the family apartment is
for Diego to live in once he is
On this day, a team from Legal A
that works in partnership with N
is dispatched to investigate.
Diego's father, Victor, shows th
of an infestation of bugs, inclu
VICTOR SALCIDO, Father (through
There are so many and we can't s
rid of them. They come and fumig
has been no relief from the prob
JACKIE JUDD: The bugs present to
health risk to Diego, whose immu
is a ticking time bomb.
Lawyer Ann Mangiameli delivers t
Diego's mother that little boy c
home.
ANN MANGIAMELI, Attorney (throug
So, what we would like to do is
to reach out and find some resou
you guys find a new apartment, a
you terminate the lease with the
and get your rental assistance o
deposit back, if that's OK with
JACKIE JUDD: Even though lawyers
the last people doctors want to
in patient care, a new attitude
hold here.
MAN: We physicians have relative
understanding of the legal proce
will say -- we say things like y
be out of that house, you ought
clean, and then I sort of wash m
it, and don't realize the downst
Somebody's got to help them get
JACKIE JUDD: Cancer surgeon Kerr
is that somebody who gathered th
In fact, she only accepted a job
Medicine once she was assured a
similar to the one she formed at
hospital, would be created.
DR. KERRY RODABAUGH, Nebraska Me
I ran a medical-legal partnershi
to find that I could not practic
without that.
We are learning that we really a
health. So, if we can get somebo
with their insurance plan, then
to be able to afford to take the
medication and their blood press
to be improved. And who would've
that, that an attorney's going t
blood pressure?
JACKIE JUDD: Omaha is part of a
modeled on a partnership founded
Doctors at Boston Medical Center
of childhood asthma to mold in h
in lawyers to take on negligent
The idea took years to catch on.
leaders say there are medical-le
now in almost 300 hospitals and
and that dozens more are being p
ANN MANGIAMELI: Housing issues a
problem.
JACKIE JUDD: The cases that Mang
her team of six lawyers and two
take on range from landlord-tena
to insurance enrollment and reim
to deathbed wishes involving chi
and wills.
ANN MANGIAMELI: They don't under
system, and that's where we help
a great deal of stress it takes
we know the system.
JACKIE JUDD: In Omaha, almost 17
the city's residents live in pov
to meet the need, the partnershi
from one department in one hospi
five of the city's major hospita
including two neighborhood clini
WOMAN: There's just a lot of que
I need to ask.
JACKIE JUDD: There, patients are
not only for health problems, bu
that lawyers could help with as
Nebraska Medicine's payments to
of Nebraska have increased from
more than $200,000 a year. And i
it has recouped $2 million from
contested reimbursements.
Partnerships are an increasingly
model for health systems, as mor
get paid by insurers, not for sp
but set amounts for keeping peop
Hospital administrator Theresa F
if everything aligns, partnershi
a win-win for patients, doctors
THERESA FRANCO, Nebraska Medicin
take some of these issues and re
of visits to a physician, reduce
of times that they're going to e
emergency room, reduce the numbe
that they're going to have to be
to the hospital, that in itself
from a standpoint of using the d
are going to be allocated going
a much more conscientious and wi
JACKIE JUDD: Those twin purposes
patients and reduced costs, brou
cancer survivor Denise Lauritsen
Aid.
Dr. Rodabaugh wouldn't put Lauri
the trauma of additional surgery
add to the cost of care, without
Lauritsen had cancer in other pa
body. So, a CAT scan was ordered
DR. KERRY RODABAUGH: She just re
have been certain of her disease
we wouldn't have been clear on w
best step for her care would hav
the CAT scan was critical.
JACKIE JUDD: But Medicaid refuse
the CAT scan. After nine months,
legal briefs and court decisions
and Lauritsen won.
DENISE LAURITSEN, Patient: It ga
of mind. I couldn't sleep at nig
all the time. I wasn't at peace
And I think that CAT scan was ju
-- just the closure on all of it
JACKIE JUDD: Lauritsen, who did
in 2014, is now strong and well.
Because medical-legal partnershi
new, research to prove and to qu
they improve health outcomes is
beginning. Diego's mother alread
that having lawyers work side by
the medical team has boosted her
of living a long life.
HILDA OLMEDO CUEVAS (through tra
It's a lot of help I'm receiving
God for all of the angels he has
JACKIE JUDD: This is Jackie Judd
NewsHour" in Omaha.
JUDY WOODRUFF: This story was pr
collaboration with the Solutions
Network.
GWEN IFILL: As students head bac
colleges and universities across
are facing a growing demand for
care.
Schools have long provided couns
increasingly, colleges are facin
about how to best treat a studen
one at risk.
Hari Sreenivasan is in our New Y
with the story.
HARI SREENIVASAN: In fact, rates
and depression among college stu
U.S. have soared in the past dec
more awareness of problems, risk
and combined with the stresses o
life, schools are trying to figu
right course of treatment, couns
intervention.
"The Chronicle of Higher Educati
this in a new series about what
epidemic of anguish.
Jennifer Ruark is the editor of
which has been in the works for
And Micky Sharma joins us. He is
of the Association for the Unive
College Counseling Center Direct
director of the Office of Studen
MD-BOat Ohio State.
So, Jennifer, I want to start wi
reporters spent a long time on t
What did you all find?
JENNIFER RUARK, "The Chronicle o
Well, we found that colleges are
increase in the number of studen
to counseling centers with anxie
with clinical depression.
And they're also seeing more inc
serious situations that need imm
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, Micky Shar
and I'm thinking about this and
listen, haven't the stresses of
from home, perhaps the big break
girlfriend or boyfriend or partn
a test when you get there, hasn'
around for decades, as long as c
been around?
What is so different about the s
now?
MICKY SHARMA, Ohio State Univers
I think there's many things that
some of these changes that Jenni
to.
I think the stigma regarding men
has decreased locally here at Oh
nationally across the country. S
more apt to reach out and meet w
when they're struggling with thi
We have students in this generat
working and growing up in a very
society. There's additional stre
things that they're carrying on
And there's an increase in the a
we see in students.
Traditionally, historically, dep
always the number one thing that
brought to university counseling
About four years ago, that flipp
anxiety is the number one presen
that students bring to the couns
at Ohio State, as well as nation
depression is number two. And th
between anxiety and depression,
year.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Jennifer, are
dealing with this change differe
In a couple of your stories, I f
one school really tried to send
as fast as possible to get help,
school didn't. There doesn't see
uniformity.
JENNIFER RUARK: Every school obv
its students to be in an environ
learning is possible, both for t
individual and for the rest of h
classmates.
But the care that they're able t
widely from campus to campus. Yo
college campuses that are able t
on-site psychiatrist, but there
don't. There are many campuses w
have as many hours available at
center, who are staffing the cen
or trying to rely more on peer e
faculty intervention, simply bec
don't have the resources that th
HARI SREENIVASAN: Micky Sharma,
one of the biggest schools in th
probably better-resourced than,
colleges or graduate schools aro
that might also be dealing with
and these challenges.
But what are the appropriate bou
an institution of learning today
for the mental, the physical, th
the psychological well-being of
because someone is going to ask,
your job just to be a university
and help teach? Now we're really
to think about health care and m
care.
MICKY SHARMA: So, I think that t
the university is to provide as
can in terms of support services
be academically successful.
And, at the end of the day, that
counseling centers are doing. Th
my center is doing, is providing
students, so that they can come
be successful, graduate, earn a
launch their career.
So, for many university counseli
what we're doing is providing sh
and on a time-limited basis at m
so that we're able to provide st
reach as many students as possib
Additionally, many centers have
providing a menu of service opti
majority of what we do is indivi
but there's a lot of group couns
we offer, as well as drop-in wor
get coping strategies, better st
strategies in the hands of as ma
as possible.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Jennifer, what
reporters find about the balanci
some schools are having to do be
to have their student population
well cared for on the one hand a
privacy rights on the other?
JENNIFER RUARK: Well, a college
to know whether students come to
preexisting mental health condit
the student or his family choose
that.
About one in four students repor
counseling centers now are alrea
kind of psychotropic medicine, i
of the lifting of the stigma tha
to earlier. So, if a faculty mem
notices a troubled student or no
that a student may be troubled,
that student to seek counseling
to people, but unless it becomes
situation, they can't really for
to seek counseling.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Micky Sharma,
little bit about the challenge t
If you have a larger population
you year after year who might al
been in therapy for several year
come to college or if, as Jennif
to, if they're already on prescr
what does that do when you have
them first?
MICKY SHARMA: So, in terms of wh
to the services at the universit
center is, it forces us to look
ways to reach students.
So, as I mentioned before, we do
center -- the individual therapy
one thing that we do, but we als
who provide treatment. But we a
other forms of resources to prov
such as psychoeducational progra
group counseling that we provide
more students simultaneously, an
matching the services to a parti
need.
I often tell our faculty and sta
a student is crying doesn't mean
needs psychotherapy. Sometimes,
the emotional response that I wa
So we're looking at getting the
of service to match an individua
need.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right, Mic
Jennifer Ruark, thanks so much f
us.
JENNIFER RUARK: Thank you.
MICKY SHARMA: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight,
an essay: a new occasional featu
"NewsHour" bringing, we hope, a
on provocative issues.
Tonight, we hear from author Jos
He gives us his thoughts on the
property, such as inventions, li
artistic works, and what it mean
stolen.
JOSHUA COHEN, Author: What's the
that a pirate is afraid of. The
I remember hearing that joke whe
years old. I remember the guy I
His name was Herman Pollack (ph)
older guy around the synagogue a
a lot of jokes, and a lot of the
pirates.
Why did the pirate quit his ship
poetry? He did it for the love o
Anyway, this guy from the synago
jokes to me, and he told them to
charge. And now "NewsHour" is pa
tell them to you. How do I justi
I owe Herman Pollack or his heir
of whatever I'm earning?
A few years after I heard the jo
first time I went online, 1994.
first time online for a lot of p
many ways, mine was a test gener
was free for us or felt free. We
music, we downloaded it. We want
out a photo and hang it on the w
We downloaded books, or e-books,
click. Woe downloaded games. It
like a game.
There was so much to hear and se
We played around in the imaginat
or whoever it was who produced a
They weren't even strangers. The
even human. Culture just came ou
I remember clicking on some site
and some of the jokes on the sit
knew. And I remember that feelin
this was created by anyone. It w
here to begin with.
But then I started writing for m
I came to know the months, the y
to make something and the pride
made something, how it feels to
for bringing a reader a spark.
Now, I take credit, and not mone
the chief evil or piracy or inte
theft or whatever you choose to
not that it deprives me and othe
of a living, but that it deprive
and even the art itself of a lif
It's my belief that culture has
for, if not with money or even p
with time and attention. There a
to hear and see and read than ev
but the cheaper it is to get you
them, the cheaper your appreciat
will be.
The cost of a thing is the care
Fact is, you could rip off a mil
but they're not truly yours if y
going to read them. Songs aren't
they're never heard. Films aren'
they're never watched. Canons ca
they can't evolve if the memory
is your computers, and not your
Culture must be lived. It must b
It can't just be in a folder on
or a bundle of bytes on your har
Pollack, the man who told me the
seemed to love pirate jokes beca
about language, they were about
English was the fourth language
He learned these jokes, and they
the language. Herman grew up in
didn't have as many books as our
what decent books that world had
to burn. Because Herman didn't h
access to books, he took to memo
he could find. Memorizing these
how he earned them, how he owned
His memory of them was his trues
No one could take that away from
reminds me. Why don't pirates ev
alphabet? Because after A and B,
all their lives at C.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour" on
Centers for Disease Control and
says roughly half of U.S. adults
chronic conditions like arthriti
and HIV. For many, these illness
invisible, showing no obvious sy
why two friends, both sufferers
decided to launch a photo campai
light on some of these hidden il
can see a photo essay and find o
can participate in a Twitter cha
on Friday.
Details are on our home page. Th
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's the "N
tonight.
On Thursday, Margaret Warner tak
at the debate among American Jew
Iran deal and whether it's good
and America.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again here to
For all of us here at the "PBS N
thank you, and good night.